The soft-fruit Genetic Improvement Network (GIN) will provide a platform for the genetic improvement of the major soft fruit crops in the UK, a space for knowledge exchange and training to deliver the knowledge into industry outputs. The project will enable the soft-fruit sector to generate improvements in sustainability, resilience and resource-use efficiency that fit into the UK Government’s Net Zero Strategy, which intends to halve net UK emissions in around a decade and eliminate them by 2050, while at the same time maintaining quality and nutritional standards as well as economic production. Research and development towards these goals through a soft-fruit GIN will provide vital knowledge, tools and germplasm resources to enable the soft-fruit industry to meet these goals and deliver significant benefits towards the public good.
Over the past two decades, UK soft-fruit breeding programs have focussed on supplying the industry with new high quality, high yielding varieties that meet the demands of the retail customers. To this end the key traits that have been prioritised in new varieties are large fruit size, high yields, shelf-life, attractive berries and good flavour. There is an inherent trade-off between many of the essential traits within soft-fruit and yield and quality attributes have been favoured over other attributes. This strategy has led to the development of many successful new varieties and has contributed to significant increases in average fruit size, as well as in yields. However, this has only been possible with significant inputs, increasing costs, and there has been no focus on increasing resilience of soft-fruit crops. Whilst soft-fruit purchasing is not monopolised in the UK, there are a limited number of very large retail customers, who are themselves being challenged to be more competitive on price. This means attributes such as nutritional quality, sustainable production and resource-use efficiency are of significantly lower priority in the production cycle, where the key to profitability is viewed as delivery of consistent yields and quality at a low production cost. It is therefore extremely timely for the formation of a pre-competitive soft-fruit GIN focussed on resilience, sustainability, nutritional and efficiency traits. 
